[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
Have you ever struggled
with addiction,
the kind that gets
a hold of you,
and then you're in
maybe denial of the fact
that it's gotten a hold of you?
Or are you just maybe
a social drinker
that drinks maybe
seven nights a week?
And that leads to more and
more drinking or drug use?
Well, joining me is Tommy Rosen.
He's an internationally
recognized yoga teacher
and addiction and
recovery expert.
He has spent the last
two decades immersed
in yoga, recovery, and wellness,
which is very important.
He holds advanced certifications
in both hatha and kundalini
yoga, and he has more
than 23 years of recovery
from acute drug addiction.
And I'm so glad
you're here, Tommy,
thank you for joining me.
>>TOMMY ROSEN: Thank you, Lisa.
It is great to be with you.
>>LISA: I am so happy.
Now, you have combined these
two worlds of yoga and recovery
together.
Why did you put
those two together?
>>ROSEN: I like to
say that necessity
is the mother of
invention, you know?
In our world today, when people
move, say, through addiction,
and they're finding
out, I have a problem,
and hopefully they've reached
a point where they can actually
say, I have a problem, this
thing is bigger than me,
there's a couple of
directions that someone
could take to get better.
One of the directions is
to enter a 12 step program.
Another direction
is to have some form
of therapeutic process
going on, a one
on one process with a therapist.
Different modalities.
Another is to enter
in-patient treatment,
or to have outpatient treatment.
And though all of those
systems are really
built to help you out
of chronic addiction,
to help you move from, OK,
I'm somebody that's stuck.
I have this issue, whether
that's drugs, alcohol, food,
sex, relationships, money--
>>LISA: Gambling, whatever, yes.
>>ROSEN: Gambling,
the whole deal.
We'll help you to
move down a path where
you can get out of
chronic addiction.
Once you're out of
chronic addiction,
now you have a foundation,
which is wonderful.
And a miracle has taken place.
You've gotten out of addiction.
But now, you're back to
facing all of the things
about yourself that
you may have turned
to addictive behavior in
the first place to avoid.
>>LISA: I see, I see, yes.
>>ROSEN: So now,
the question really
that happens for most of
us in recovery is now what?
>>LISA: You need a practice.
>>ROSEN: Some kind of practice
that brings the body into it.
We learn-- most of us learn the
hard way-- I certainly learned
the hard way-- that there is a
deeper level of detoxification
which is necessary in the
body to be completely at ease
and to move forward in your life
and to be able to really start
to unravel the
traumas of your life.
>>LISA: Physical and
mental detoxification.
>>ROSEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Can you back us up a
little bit into your story?
How did you discover
in the first place
that you were in that
place of serious addiction?
>>ROSEN: Originally,
well, it certainly
wasn't hard to see,
for most people.
I came, as most people
do, I had this perspective
that I know I'm in trouble.
Like, I even knew
I'm in trouble here.
But I'd always been
able to right the ship.
So that was-- the
basis of my denial
was I've always been able
to get through it before.
I'll figure out a way
to get through it again.
But that moment never came.
>>LISA: So you
would always maybe
get clean and sober
for a little while,
and you'd be OK
for a little while?
>>ROSEN: It wouldn't be
anything so clear as that.
It would be-- I'd be
partying for a run, taking
a lot of drugs and
alcohol, drinking,
partying, the whole thing.
And then there'd be--
I'd realize, wow,
this has got to stop.
And I'd put it on
hold for a week.
Put it on hold for a couple
weeks, not get clean and sober,
nothing like that.
>>LISA: Yes, I see.
>>ROSEN: This was
back originally.
Finally, what happened
for me is what
happens for a lot of people is I
reached what's called a bottom.
And I now know that
a bottom really
is just the moment when you're
ready to tell the truth.
>>LISA: Oh, it's
just the beginning.
>>ROSEN: It's just
that moment that
happens where you're like, OK.
This thing is bigger than me.
I can't do this.
I can't go on living
like I'm living,
but I have no idea
how else to live.
>>LISA: How to stop.
So it's not a stop.
It's an oh my god, I need to
stop, but I'm out of control
and don't know how.
>>ROSEN: That's right.
And you pray at that
moment that somebody
is there to help guide
you towards some help.
>>LISA: Was someone
there for you?
>>ROSEN: My family was there.
My whole family was there.
Thank god they had
not abandoned me
through all of my
shenanigans all these years.
And they helped me
to get treatment.
And I went off to
Hazelton, which
is a really wonderful treatment
center up in Minnesota.
>>LISA: OK.
And did you-- Now, you were
in your 20s at the time?
>>ROSEN: I was 22.
>>LISA: And out of college?
>>ROSEN: Young man.
I was a senior in college
when I left to go to rehab.
>>LISA: Hm.
So a ton of potential, but you
didn't-- so where do you think,
looking back now, that got lost?
That potential got misdirected?
>>ROSEN: And that's a
great question, Lisa,
because what you'll hear about
most addicts and alcoholics is
people will tell them their
whole childhood, my god,
you have so much potential!
You have so much potential!
How come you're not
realizing your potential?
And then later on, when you're
doing drugs and alcohol,
why don't you just stop?
Why can't you just stop?
That potential that so
many alcoholics and addicts
have hopefully gets realized
later on in recovery.
For me, it began really
when I was 13 years old.
And the discomfort
of my childhood
coupled with an atrocious
diet and no sense
of how to sit still or to manage
stress, a lot of emotional pain
in my relationships at
home, a lot of struggles.
It all culminated in just
a level of discomfort
that I was absolutely
unwilling to face.
So when I found,
actually, marijuana--
when I found marijuana,
it was at the time
the greatest find of my life.
>>LISA: It relaxed you?
>>ROSEN: First
time, I felt like it
was the first deep breath I
had taken in my life ever.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ROSEN: And it was Nancy
Reagan and Ronald Reagan,
they were in power
in the United States.
And Nancy had her
Just Say No campaign.
It just didn't quite cover
the problem for me, you know?
Just say no wasn't working.
So I just went down this road.
>>LISA: Did you ever
hear that in recovery?
Just say no!
>>ROSEN: Well, it's so absurd.
It's like walking up
to a homeless person.
Why don't you just get a home?
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>ROSEN: It's not taking the
full picture into account.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's easy to say, but
harder and harder to do.
So when you found recovery, and
then you got out of recovery,
how did you find yoga?
>>ROSEN: OK, so
my story is really
a story of recovery
within recovery.
Now, my first year
of recovery was 1991.
I went to rehab in '89.
I stayed sober for a year.
I relapsed for a whole year.
In, out, in, out, in, out, can't
stay sober, can't stay sober.
At the end of that
year, June 23, 1991,
was the last time I
had a drug or a drink.
That year, I was
in San Francisco.
And there was this
big sign, yoga!
I had heard about yoga, and
I'd been interested in yoga,
but I'd certainly
never ventured--
I literally walked off the
street into a yoga class.
The teacher's name
was Janet McCloud.
She's still a teacher today.
And I walked into her class.
And a couple things were
remarkable about this class
and about her.
Number one, she moved with
so much elegance and grace
that I couldn't believe it.
I literally thought I
was looking at a cartoon.
And she would bend or
get into a yoga pose.
And she'd move to
the point that you
thought a normal human
being should move to.
And then, she'd just keep going.
>>LISA: Beyond?
Wow.
>>ROSEN: And I was like,
this doesn't look correct.
The feeling that I had was
she had so much freedom
in her body, it was an
outward representation
of what I had always
been looking for.
I'd been looking for freedom.
I'd been looking for a way out.
How do I transcend the
problems of my life?
How do I move
beyond things that I
don't know how to move beyond?
In her body, the way that she
moved, her elegance, her grace,
it was that.
And I wanted it so badly.
And I had a
relationship with yoga
for the next-- I've had
a relationship with yoga
since then.
But I had one kind
of relationship
with yoga through
the first 12 years
of my recovery, which was
very physically based.
It wasn't much about going
deeper or meditation.
It was just, let's
get a good workout.
Let's get a good sweat.
And let's breathe and move.
And that's great.
And that's wonderful.
>>LISA: And it started
to detoxify your body?
>>ROSEN: Oh, no question,
I moved forward.
>>LISA: And did you clean up
your diet at the same time?
>>ROSEN: Not completely.
It took a little while.
My diet certainly
came a long way
from where I was as a child.
>>LISA: Which was?
>>ROSEN: I hadn't had a salad
until I was 18 years old.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ROSEN: I didn't
eat vegetables.
I ate processed
food of every kind--
candy and Doritos and Coca-Cola.
I bounced through my
childhood from one sugar
event to the next, basically.
All the meat that
I ate was-- came
from animals that basically
lived horrible lives
and then were killed.
Nothing was organic.
Nothing was free range.
Everything was artificial.
I suffered around that diet.
I was sick so much as a child.
I set my body and my mind
up for a whopping case
of drug addiction later on.
>>LISA: Because of the
other chemicals in the food?
>>ROSEN: Oh, the
chemicals in the food,
but just also that
you're making yourself
into a weaker human being.
And this is a point that I
like to talk to people about is
that I really see that addiction
is a opportunistic disease.
I believe it will take
advantage of weakness.
So part of recovery for me,
and this is the key part,
is you have to build yourself
into a strong person.
I don't mean just physically
strong, at every level.
>>LISA: That's a great point.
So a weakened immune system
is a Petri dish for addiction.
>>ROSEN: Oh yeah,
for any disease.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Was there addiction
genetically in your family?
Or did that come
into play at all?
>>ROSEN: The genetic
piece for me--
so I can look back at my family.
And I can tell you that
we've had a couple suicides
over the past three or
four generations, so
certainly depression.
Certainly my mother
struggled with alcoholism.
My grandfather struggled.
There's elements in
there, not everybody,
but there's elements
through there.
When I think about the
genetic question, genetics
most people are like, oh,
well I have these genetics.
What can I do about it?
Or I have a predisposition,
I better be very careful.
The fact is that the
science of epigenetics
is helping us understand that
our behavior, our attitude,
the people we hang out
with, the food that we eat,
the environments
we put ourselves in
are going to actually have an
effect on our genetic readout.
>>LISA: It turns on all
those genetic markers, right?
>>ROSEN: Or doesn't allow
the bad ones to turn on.
So if that addiction
marker is not turned on,
you could have the
predisposition for alcoholism
but never become an alcoholic.
So it begs the question,
what's involved?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ROSEN: So environment.
If I said to you,
Lisa, do you think
you would know how to
make-- how to nurture
and how to create a
healthy human being?
Somebody who felt a sense
of esteem for themself?
Somebody who felt good, who felt
confident, who felt healthy?
>>LISA: I've had
to learn all that.
>>ROSEN: Right, we all have.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>ROSEN: But you
know how to do it.
And the same thing goes
for if I said to you, Lisa,
we're going to take
this child, and we're
going to make an addict
out of this child,
you'd know exactly what to do.
Treat them inconsistently.
Make them feel bad
about themselves.
Give them a really,
really addictive diet
based on a lot of sugar.
Make them feel insecure in who
they are and what they are.
And then, right when
they're coming of age,
introduce an
addictive substance.
And boom, it's done.
>>LISA: Like sugar,
like caffeine?
>>ROSEN: Like
marijuana, alcohol, sex.
>>LISA: Well, food.
>>ROSEN: Food.
>>LISA: Yeah, too much food,
and soothing emotions with food.
>>ROSEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: That's another huge--
it doesn't have to necessarily
be-- it could be a legal
substance, like food.
>>ROSEN: Anything that you use
to help yourself to feel better
that causes-- creates
craving and ultimately brings
negative consequences
into your life.
>>LISA: From the outside in.
So basically, the
antidote to setting up
the body for addiction is
to develop the strength
from the inside out.
>>ROSEN: Absolutely,
along with connections,
healthy connections
with other human beings.
It turns out we need these.
>>LISA: Yes!
We do.
That's yes.
I know sometimes
I'm on the island.
>>ROSEN: Exactly, exactly.
>>LISA: But sometimes, you
have to go to the island
in order to know where
the other people are.
>>ROSEN: Well,
there's a difference
between solitude and loneliness.
>>LISA: That's a great point.
>>ROSEN: Or solitude
and isolation.
>>LISA: So let's
talk about the mind.
You have a great video here
that talks about the ego
and how to eradicate the ego.
>>ROSEN: Ego eradicator.
>>LISA: Ego eradicator.
I actually want to take
a look at this video.
Take a look with Tommy talking
about the ego eradicator.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-What's up, daily love posse?
This is Tommy Rosen.
And this week's vlog
is all about what
you can do when your mind
becomes a bad neighborhood.
Most everybody can relate
to this idea of waking up
on the wrong side of the bed,
feeling like your mind has
control of you rather
than the other way around.
I feel like most people
have that experience
every single day.
What can we do to get
control of our mind?
I'm going to show you a
yoga exercise now called
ego eradicator.
It's three minutes in length.
You can extend it to
any length you'd like,
but three minutes will do it.
Trust me.
We'll do it together
and have this experience
of what it's like to gain
control over your mind
and to be able to focus
yourself and align yourself
with the day that's yet to come.
OK.
In order to do
this exercise, you
have to learn Breath of Fire.
It's a really simple breath.
I'll teach it to you right now.
The one caveat is, if you're
pregnant or menstruating,
please don't do Breath of Fire.
Do ego eradicator,
this exercise,
with long, deep
breathing instead.
OK, to do Breath of Fire,
we emphasize the exhale.
And the inhale is passive.
When we exhale through
the nose rapidly,
we pull our navel point in.
Just like that.
So the inhale, it just
happens automatically.
The exhale, however,
is emphasized;
we're really moving the
air through the nostrils
rapidly as we pull
the navel point in.
OK, we're going to
add the arms to this.
So come up sitting
nice and tall.
Bring the arms up to 60 degrees.
Keep the arms
perfectly straight.
We'll close our eyes now.
And I'm going to focus my eyes
right here in between the two
eyebrows.
Take a deep inhale.
And let's begin Breath of Fire.
So take a deep inhale.
Touch the thumbs together
over the head, and exhale.
And relax.
So we did that for about
30 seconds to a minute.
Imagine three minutes a day
when you wake up each morning.
It'll give you inner
calm, strength,
and it's a tool you can use
to get control of your mind
before it gets control of you.
I wish that for you.
Have a great day.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Where did you
learn that breath exercise?
That was very powerful.
>>ROSEN: The ego
eradicator exercise
comes from the
kundalini yoga tradition
as taught by Yogi Bhajan.
So Yogi Bhajan brought that
one, and it brings together
a couple pretty
powerful element.
So you're working
with Breath of Fire,
which is a very powerful
breath, very detoxifying, very
energizing, focusing, very
powerful breath, increases
the lung capacity,
does a lot for you.
You're also working
with the arms
at a certain angle,
at 60 degrees.
So you're being asked
to keep your arms up
for a long period of time,
maybe three minutes or more.
And at some point in that
three minutes, your shoulders
>>LISA: Burn.
>>ROSEN: They're going to burn.
There's going to be a
conversation going on.
And the shoulders--
the mind will pipe in,
and the mind will say, you
know, please put your arms down.
Would you please
lower your arms?
Well, that's quite enough now.
No, seriously, put
your arms down.
And the conversation will
get more and more intense.
At a certain point, you stay
committed to the exercise.
You're digging deeper than
the muscles of the body.
Yes, you need your muscles
to hold your arms up,
but there's something
else going on.
What controls the muscles?
It's actually your
nervous system.
So the brain sends
an impulse down
through the central nervous
system, through the spine,
spinal cord, goes out to the
peripheral nervous system.
And it causes you
to use your muscles
to keep your arms
straight at 60 degrees.
The mind is presenting
a constant temptation.
The temptation is
lower the arms.
So what you're
actually doing is you
are facing a temptation, minute
to minute, breath by breath,
and you're resisting
the temptation.
>>LISA: Overriding.
>>ROSEN: Overriding, making
your nervous system stronger.
You're actually tuning
your nervous system
to be able to resist
the temptation.
Now, when you get
out into the world,
there's all kinds
of temptations.
If we're going to
talk about addictions,
well, they're
everywhere all the time.
But maybe you're
trying to lose weight,
and you struggle with
a chocolate cake.
You come across a deli
window, and lo and behold,
there in the window is this
gorgeous piece of chocolate
cake.
>>LISA: And you're
having a bad day.
>>ROSEN: Having a rough day.
Maybe you just had a bad
conversation with someone
you love or whatever it is.
And boy, that icing is
starting to look good.
And remember the first
time you had that cake?
And your mind starts
going down that road.
So now, you're in that
realm of temptation.
And so you are either going
to resist the temptation
and allow it to
pass and move on,
or you'll succumb
to the temptation,
and you'll have
the chocolate cake.
Now, just by practicing
strengthening your resolve
in the face of
temptation, represented
by keeping your arms
up when it's difficult,
you are increasing
the likelihood
you'll be able to resist
the temptation later on out
in the world.
>>LISA: And now how
does the kundalini
come into play with that?
Explain what that is
specifically, if you could.
>>ROSEN: So the
kundalini energy is
thought to be the potential
energy of a human being which
exists and stays
locked, unaccessed,
at the base of the spine,
right in the sacrum,
right in the base of the spine.
And through these exercises,
we are tapping into
and releasing that energy,
distributing it around the body
so that we can become a fully
actualized and activated
individual.
>>LISA: Beautiful.
>>ROSEN: That is a
beautiful concept.
And sometimes, that's a bit
above someone else's head.
>>LISA: No, that was a
beautiful definition.
>>ROSEN: OK.
I would just simply
say to people,
you know, we all
know somebody that
is completely in their power.
And you see them, and you think,
my god, they're just on point.
They're just doing what
they're supposed to be doing.
It looks and it feels just
like they're right on mission.
They're activated.
Somehow, they've tapped
into that energy.
Maybe they've practice
kundalini yoga.
Maybe it got
activated another way.
But they are-- they've dug
into their personal self,
and they're able to
create from that place.
Amazing to be around them.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ROSEN: These exercises
really help us.
And when you've
been so off track
to be caught in addiction,
to be able to come back home
to the home office, which is the
heart, that is very powerful.
These practices
really help with that.
>>LISA: There is
a video here where
Tommy's talking about how he
got in touch with kundalini.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-People sometimes ask me,
why build a yoga and recovery
program?
What is the benefit?
Why do this?
And what I tell them is when
I turned 20 years sober,
I went to pick up
my 20 year chip.
The guy who handed me that
chip had, congratulations!
You're 1 in 1,000.
I thought to myself,
like, how grim is that?
999 people aren't
going to make it,
and one person makes it
to long term sobriety.
That's what he was
essentially saying.
And I thought, my god,
there's a better way.
There has to be a way to
improve those odds for people
out there who are trying
to-- not just trying
to get into recovery, but
people who've been in recovery.
How do you stay on that path?
I consider myself one of
the most fortunate people
in the world.
I was able to find the
amazing program, the 12 steps,
and to overcome acute addiction.
What I did not find were ways
that I could more effectively
live my life and get over
some of the other kinds
of addictions that I
was still dealing with.
I still was living in
the energy of addiction
even in my recovery.
How do I get beyond
the energy of addiction
to what I would
call true recovery?
And the answer came for me
through the path of yoga.
Yoga helps you
build the capacity
to move the issues
out of your tissues.
Stuck emotional energy
and trauma in the body
keeps you stuck in the past.
Yoga moves those energies
through and liberates you
so you can become fully present.
And all those years of
recovery, which were amazing,
and I was overcoming
acute drug addiction,
those were wonderful years.
But I needed something more.
And I found it.
There are practices
that exist that
will make your
recovery stronger,
that will stack the
odds more in your favor
to stay on that path, that will
prevent relapse from happening,
and that will help you to
build a fulfilling, sweet life.
My recovery in the 12
steps took me to the point
where I overcame
acute addiction.
But I was still swimming
in the energy of addiction
in other ways in my life.
And it was no longer
acceptable to me.
And the way the universe
made that clear to me was it
took away my ability to move.
I developed a debilitating
back condition.
I could no longer
walk without pain.
It got worse and
worse and worse.
I tried everything I
could to get over it.
More yoga, no yoga,
trainers, massage therapists,
chiropractors, anything
I could get my hands on.
And I was still sick.
I started to feel like
maybe this was it.
Like at 35 years old,
I was just not going
to be able to walk and
move freely anymore.
It was a very
frightening time for me.
So one day, a friend
comes to me and says,
look, if you really
want to heal your back,
you need to go see this
guy named Guru Prem.
And I'm thinking
Guru Prem, Guru Prem.
No, I'm not going
to go see some guru.
Like, I've been through
all these people.
All these things.
I'm trying, trying everything.
But I'm not going to some guru.
I can see the
turban and the beard
and the robes, the whole thing,
and it's just not for me.
So my friend says,
OK, that's fine.
Well, that night I went
out to dinner with my wife.
And there was a woman at
the table next to ours.
And we struck up a conversation.
She had just moved
to Los Angeles.
And we asked why,
what brings you here?
She says, oh, I came
here really to see
this man named Guru Prem.
So you see, my life has been
a series of second chances
like this.
Despite myself, I got
the pretty clear message
that I was supposed to see
this guy named Guru Prem.
I called him the next morning
and I said, apparently,
I'm supposed to come see you.
And he said, well, you
better get in here then.
For the next five years, I
sat opposite him once a week.
He taught me how to breathe.
He taught me how to move.
He taught me how to
interact with people.
He taught me about
relationships with women.
He gave me a parameter
for living my life
in a way that made sense to me.
Essentially, he gave
me things to aspire to.
And he taught me kundalini yoga.
And in three months, I
was able to heal my back.
I had been told
by the top doctors
here that it was manage your
pain for the rest of your life,
and eventually we'll
look to surgery.
And thank god that was not the
fate that ended up unfolding
for me.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So would it be fair to
say that in your introduction
to kundalini, you came up with
this concept of recovery 2.0,
or it was kind of
birthed inside of you?
>>ROSEN: My discovery
of kundalini yoga
came through my
teacher, Guru Prem.
I can't say enough about him and
the way he's affected my life
and many other people's
in a positive way.
He taught me how
to breathe first.
He taught me how to move.
He taught me kundalini yoga,
how to tap into my true self,
how to live from that place.
No one had ever shown
me these things.
I'd never-- I'd
been so off track.
Even in recovery, I'd
>>LISA: So you said your
beginning introduction to yoga
was the physical part of it.
>>ROSEN: Super physical.
And this is not to say that
kundalini yoga is not physical.
It's very physical.
But its emphasis is more on
nervous system strengthening
and on endocrine
system rebalancing.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ROSEN: Of course, you're going
to get super strong physically
as well, calming the mind,
all of these things, sure.
It also gives you this
feeling of immense bliss
in the practice.
Now, I talk to people about
the infinite pharmacy within.
So inside of us, we have
an infinite pharmacy.
Now, this should be of
particular note and of interest
to people who've struggled
with drug addiction before.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>ROSEN: What are
we looking for?
We're looking for a feeling
of well being, a feeling
of connectedness at
any given moment.
Well, it just so happens that
our endocrine system, which
is our chemical system, I call
that the infinite pharmacy
within, if you know how to work
with that and tap into that,
you can get your endocrine
system to distribute
the right drugs in the
right amounts to the right
places at the right time.
>>LISA: Perfect.
>>ROSEN: And that's just
called feeling well.
>>LISA: Where the
serotonin releases
at the right time, and the
neurochemicals all balance out,
and nothing's overdone.
It's all in balance.
>>ROSEN: Yeah.
To you or me it just
looks like someone's
smiling and comfortable.
And they're enjoying their day.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>ROSEN: That's
just the right drug.
>>LISA: But you mentally can
tap into that and rise that out
from--
>>ROSEN: Physically
and mentally.
There's very specific
protocols for doing that.
But you understand
that we've been
trying to reach
outside of ourselves
for drugs, alcohol, food,
whatever it is to feel better.
We're tinkering with the
natural system within.
>>LISA: Could you teach
us a little bit of that?
>>ROSEN: Sure.
>>LISA: That would be awesome.
What is the difference
between regular yoga
and what you're
about to teach here?
>>ROSEN: Yeah, this
is just a form.
>>LISA: OK.
>>ROSEN: It's just
a form of yoga.
And it's all yoga.
It's all yoga.
The purpose of yoga, to calm
the fluctuations of the mind.
>>LISA: I would
love to learn how
to-- what you're about to teach.
And what is this?
>>ROSEN: Ego eradicator,
we'll do that, as well.
We'll tap into the endocrine
system, help you feel better.
But this is really super simple.
So what we'll
teach is-- you want
to have your feet flat
on the floor if you can,
and you're sitting
up nice and tall.
And you're bringing each
finger tip together.
Are we starting now?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ROSEN: OK.
So just bring each
finger tip together,
just like you're making a
little tent with your hands.
And the fingers will
point straight up.
And you'll keep that just right
in front of the heart center.
And relax the shoulders.
And just feel like
you're flowing.
And you'll close the eyes.
And just leave a slit, just
a slit in the eyes open.
So you're not completely closed.
You know you're here.
And through the
slit in your eyes,
you can see the fingertips.
You're not particularly
focused on anything,
but you just know
that you're here.
So we're going to do
a breath rhythm now.
And I'm going to have you
inhale for five seconds.
I'm going to have you
hold for five seconds.
exhale for five seconds.
And I'm going to count you
through a few rounds of that.
And then, you and
I will go silent.
And we'll continue our
count of inhaling for five,
pausing for five, and
exhaling for five.
We'll just go like that.
And we'll talk about what it
is, what's happening, afterward.
So the eyes are open just a
slit, sitting up nice and tall.
And begin to inhale for
one, two, three, four, five.
Pause your breath,
two, three, four, five.
Exhale, five, four,
three, two, one.
Inhale, one, two,
three, four, five.
Pause your breath,
two, three, four, five.
Exhale, four, three, two, one.
Inhale, two, three, four, five.
Pause your breath,
three, four, five.
Exhale, Four, three, two, one.
Inhale, continue
on your own count.
Inhaling five, pausing for
five, exhaling for five.
We'll be here for
just about a minute.
>>LISA: It begins
to feel like a wave.
>>ROSEN: One more round.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ROSEN: And exhale.
Good.
So then, just turn your palms
face up and close your eyes
all the way.
And just notice how
you feel inside.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>ROSEN: Allow your breathing
to return to normal.
>>LISA: I feel incredibly
alive and connected.
>>ROSEN: That's nice!
That's nice.
Me, too.
>>LISA: And calm.
>>ROSEN: And come
with the eyes open.
So that's called the meditation
to clear past emotion
and for stress relief.
So what's going on there?
On the one hand--
so this is called
a mudra, whatever we
do with our hands.
So this is a mudra, this
is a different mudra,
all kinds of different mudras.
When we do something with our
hands to seal the energy here,
that's called a mudra.
So what I ask people to do is
to envision a fetus in the womb.
As we're in fetal position,
before we develop,
our hands and our brain are one.
Our hands haven't yet
come apart from our brain.
And as the fetus develops, of
course, our hands and our arms
come apart from our brain.
So there's a deep,
deep connection
between your fingertips
and your brain.
So there's reasons
why yogis do things.
There's always
science behind it.
So when we bring these
fingertips together like this,
we're creating a balanced
center between the two
hemispheres of the brain.
This is creating a
sense of balance.
So there's a real sense
of, OK, here's my center.
Now, most people who struggle
with addiction-- actually,
most people in the world
don't breathe very well.
>>LISA: Or have that
connection with themselves.
>>ROSEN: Oh, yeah.
That's right.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>ROSEN: So as you-- addiction
is really a sense of lack.
So something's missing.
The most important thing in our
body is our breath, of course.
You can live without
food for a long time.
You can live without water
for at least a few days.
But to go without your breath
for even a few minutes, that's
a real problem for us, you know?
So the breath is the
highest, most important need
in the human body.
So what we're seeing here
is we are creating a rhythm,
and we're sending a very
deep, psychological signal
to the body.
Your core need is being met.
So that sense of
lack that an addict
might feel, if you're
going to breathe shallowly,
which most addicts do, you're
reinforcing with every breath
a sense of lack.
Does it make sense?
>>LISA: Yes, it does, it does.
You have a really
wonderful point
here where you talk about
addiction and society
and how our society sets us up
for addiction in certain ways.
I want you to take a
look at this video.
It's really a wonderful point.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-In 1935, the founder
of Alcoholics Anonymous,
Bill Wilson, had a
spiritual awakening.
Literally a white
light experience--
he was in a hospital being
treated for alcoholism
for the third or fourth
time in his life.
He had no inkling of
ever being able to get
beyond that problem.
But there he was,
in his hospital room
at night, and boom, there was
this divine, spiritual moment
that he had.
And the centerpiece of the
download that came into him
was this idea that
one person who's
struggling with the
disease of alcoholism
has to help another
person in order for them
both to be healed.
And that that next
person would have
to help people in order
for them to be healed.
The core of the enlightenment
that he experienced
was altruism.
I have to give it away if I
want to heal and keep it myself.
That is a beautiful,
amazing doctrine.
And it has lived on
through the past 80 years.
And it has saved the lives of
literally millions of people.
Families have come
back together.
Pain and suffering
have been alleviated.
And it's interesting.
You look at the doctrine.
The doctrine is the 12 steps.
And there's a real
purity in there,
as there are in many doctrines,
many spiritual paths, right?
But one of the challenges
about doctrines
is that we build a structure
around the doctrine.
Those can be churches
or synagogues or mosques
or holy places.
Or it can just be a
congregation of people
who congregate
around the doctrine.
And we congregate
around the doctrine
to protect the doctrine.
But eventually, and
almost inevitably, the day
comes where we have to
rescue the teaching back
from the congregation, back
from the structure we built
around the doctrine to
protect the doctrine
in the first place.
I feel like we're
living in that time
right now when it
comes to the 12 steps.
This conversation
about addiction--
I mean, this is a
disease that affects
everyone in our society.
If you are not a marijuana
addict, an alcoholic, a cocaine
addict, a pill addict; if
you are not a food addict,
if you are not a sex
addict, if you're not a porn
addict, if you are not
struggling with money,
gambling, over-shopping,
if you are not spending way
too much time on technology;
if that's not you,
then you know somebody and
love somebody who's struggling.
So therefore, everyone
in our society
is touched by this
massive problem.
And yet, 80 years after this
man had his spiritual awakening
and realized that all it
took was one person who
has the affliction of alcoholism
to help another person-- 80
years later, we're still
living in a society
where people feel the need
to be secretive, to be quiet.
We're still,
metaphorically speaking,
in the church basement.
12 step meetings are down there.
When is the conversation
going to come up
into the light of day?
We have a society that treats
addicts like they're criminals.
It doesn't understand that
addiction comes from trauma,
that we are criminalizing
traumatized people.
Our prison population
is the biggest
in the world per capita.
We take more drugs per
capita than any other country
in the world.
We spend more money on medical
problems related to alcoholism
and drug addiction than any
other country in the world.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: You set out a
very important point there
about that we are criminalizing
traumatized people.
Most of the people
in prison have
had some type of deep trauma in
their past, like 99% of them,
or a very, very high percent.
So what can we do
instead of putting
people who have had deep,
unresolved trauma in prison?
>>ROSEN: Well, this
is just a huge point.
>>LISA: Huge.
>>ROSEN: We have the
largest prison population
in the world in
the United States.
So if you took the entire
prison population of the world,
the United States
represents 25% of it.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ROSEN: So that means that
one in four people in prison
in the world happen to be
from the land of the free.
>>LISA: That's an interesting
way of putting it.
>>ROSEN: There's an
unfortunate irony there.
But the people
that are in prison
are-- the non-violent
offenders, so many of them
are people who struggle
with addiction, alcoholism.
In particular, I'll just
say one more statistic.
Alcohol is related in
40% of violent crime.
Alcohol has a part in
But if we're going to
talk about how to change,
how to treat people
who are traumatized,
certainly we can't treat them
by traumatizing them further.
That wouldn't be a
protocol that would
help them or help society.
>>LISA: So the addiction--
I mean, the trauma
sets off the
addiction that leads
to the alcohol or the
drug abuse that then leads
to the criminal
act, that then goes
right back into the system
of more trauma in the prison
system, right?
>>ROSEN: Yes.
One of my mentors and
someone I really admire a lot
is Dr. Gabor Mate.
He writes a lot about
addiction and speaks--
he's an exceptional
speaker and presenter.
He talks a lot about this
idea of all addiction coming
from trauma, all addiction
coming from trauma.
And so if you take a
traumatized person and you're
going to chase them and
persecute them and put them
behind bars with a bunch of
other traumatized people, some
of whom are very
violent, we know
this is not leading in
the correct direction.
So if you're going
to take-- if you
want to punish a
traumatized person,
you first ask
yourself, in so doing,
is that going to be for
the betterment of society?
Is that going to be for the
common good of everybody?
Of course not.
It's not for the
common good of anybody.
So we have to get out of
the punishment mentality
and realize, OK.
This is a sick person.
This is a person
who's traumatized.
So how do we treat them?
Well, we treat them
with treatment.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
>>ROSEN: So there's primary
treatment for addiction.
There's all manner of
trauma-related modalities
of recovering from trauma.
There's so much we're
learning about PTSD right now
with our military,
but also people
who have come out of really
rough childhoods have PTSD.
We actually know a lot about
treating that condition.
Half of these
people are dyslexic.
You've got conditions like ADD.
You have a population of people
who feel like they're separate,
who feel like they're alone,
who don't feel supported,
who feel like they're not
going to have their needs met
in the world, so they have
to go out and take it.
>>LISA: Yes, or numb it.
>>ROSEN: Or numb it.
And so what we have
to do is we have to--
in the most plain terms, we have
to connect with these people.
We have to not treat them
like they're less than.
We have to treat them
like they need something,
and to help work
with them to get them
what they need so that they can
become a healthier individual.
And ultimately, a productive
member of society.
And ultimately, a content
and vibrant human being.
>>LISA: So do you think that
12 step programs, treatment
centers, recovery centers, and
yoga are the way to do that?
>>ROSEN: Absolutely.
Certainly a better step, a
better place to go for sure.
>>LISA: What's the ultimate?
>>ROSEN: Well, the ultimate
is to have a program that's
based upon love,
kindness, compassion,
that brings together
modalities of healing
such as yoga, meditation.
>>LISA: So ashrams
would be the new prison.
>>ROSEN: I think so,
without question.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ROSEN: If you could create
a community of people that--
now understand,
we're not talking
about violent,
pathological criminals.
They're not going to fit
within this particular view.
There's different
problems there that
need to be treated
in some kind of way.
You couldn't find a male
in the United States
that hasn't at
some point thought
of the horror of
being raped in prison.
And I'm talking about-- I'm
not too close to prison,
but there's many times in my
past I could have gone there.
But for some reason, and
I thank god every day,
I didn't have to go there.
But there's no one
alive today who's
my age who doesn't
think about that.
We've seen too
many images on TV.
We've seen-- we've
heard the stories.
This is what our solution is
for people who are criminals?
We're going to put them into a--
basically a hotbed of addiction
with other criminals?
How can that be the solution
of a merciful society?
>>LISA: Well, in
the case of recovery
and where you're talking
about acute drug abuse
here, when somebody
goes into a place,
and to avoid all of that, and
avoid going into a prison,
someone needs to stay in a place
of their right mind, right?
So they need to stay
in a place of recovery.
>>ROSEN: For a while.
>>LISA: Forever.
>>ROSEN: Or they have to
stay on the path of recovery,
sure, one day at
a time, forever.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
And how do you
suggest someone can
do that to avoid all
that we just talked about
with the prisons?
How do you avoid that and stay
on that one day at a time?
How do you stay there?
>>ROSEN: Are you
asking me, or are you
asking a person who
struggles with crime?
>>LISA: Hm.
I'm asking everyone.
>>ROSEN: Well, the way--
if you're asking me,
what I teach in the
world is, in my opinion,
one of the greatest,
most powerful, spiritual,
and logistically correct
approaches to life
is the one day at
a time philosophy.
Start to bring it
down into a day.
If you're in the
beginning of your recovery
and you're craving
drugs and alcohol,
you're craving whatever it is
that's your drug of choice,
and you don't know how you're
going to get through it,
and will this ever
pass, all you need to do
is get to bed without using.
Just go to sleep at night
not having used that day.
And that's a successful day.
Later on, one day at
a time takes much more
of a spiritual significance.
>>LISA: Right.
Because you're not going
to do it by just saying no.
You have to have a
practice within the waking
hours of that day.
>>ROSEN: That's right.
And you start to realize
that nothing is ever
going to happen tomorrow.
I have today, only today.
I'm developing a relationship
with presence, with the now.
Eckhart Tolle obviously
writes a lot about this.
We are going to create a
relationship with ourself which
can be comfortable
in the here and now.
>>LISA: OK, yes.
>>ROSEN: The creation
of that ability
to sit still, to cultivate a
relationship with oneself is,
to me, the antidote to addiction
and the antidote to crime.
But lately, as
far as I can tell,
we haven't really been
teaching that in prison much.
There's a few programs that we
hear about now and then, but--
>>LISA: Programs that come into
the prisons, but not programs
you can go to instead
of the prisons.
>>ROSEN: Well
absolutely, and look,
if you put any human
being on crack cocaine,
or you put any human
being on heroin,
you bring into them the
phenomenon of craving.
I'm telling you, that that
person, whoever they were--
I don't care what their moral
standing is, I don't care what
their ethics are--
they will steal.
They will cheat.
They will lie, and ultimately
they will kill if they have to.
>>LISA: To get
back to that drug.
>>ROSEN: It's not
because they're
a cheater, a liar, a
thief, and a murderer.
>>LISA: It's because
they're an addict.
>>ROSEN: It's because
And that's how addicts behave.
>>LISA: Well, there is a great
clip here of you talking about
is it true that once an
addict, always an addict?
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-How do we measure
success in recovery?
Is success a metric?
Oh, I stayed sober for a year.
Nevermind the fact that I
was miserable for the year,
but I stayed sober.
Isn't that a success?
No!
That's not a success to me.
Success is measured
on the inside.
How do we create
profound transformation
within a human being?
So that a person
who used to think
about drugs and alcohol or
some other addictive behavior
all the time no longer
thinks about those behaviors,
and now actually is more
concerned about the well-being
of family and community,
maybe about manifesting dreams
and helping other
people to do the same?
How do we create a
success if we don't even
know what it looks like?
If we're always in
12 step meetings
and we're always raising
our hand, I'm Tommy,
I'm an addict, that puts a
mixed signal out into the world,
doesn't it?
I'm 23 years in recovery.
If I'm saying to a person
who doesn't understand,
I'm an addict, I'm an
alcoholic, doesn't that
send a signal to them that
I don't think I'm well?
That I haven't yet
gotten past this thing?
When do you recover?
How does a success look?
Well, addiction of
all kinds doesn't
look like you think it looks.
It looks like me.
It looks like him.
It looks like her.
It looks like people at every
economic level in our society,
people of every
race, creed, gender.
If we don't come out
and tell our story,
if we don't share with the
world what a success looks like,
why would anybody except a
desperate person, broken down,
ever want to be attracted
into a 12 step room?
Is it a party going on in there?
Well, actually, it is a
party going on in there,
but you wouldn't know it because
unless you're a desperate, fall
down drunk, I had
nowhere else to turn,
so I turned to the 12 steps--
unless you were that desperate,
you wouldn't end up there.
Unless a court sent you there,
Unless your family left you,
you wouldn't end up there.
Because you don't know what
a success looks like that's
come out of those rooms.
People get on my case from 12
step programs all the time.
And don't get me wrong.
I love the 12 steps.
They saved my life.
And I love most of its members.
Most of the people who
follow that path, I really
appreciate the idea that these
people are going to live along
a spiritual path,
work at being honest,
try to clean up their mistakes.
I love all those things.
It's a wonderful,
wonderful program.
A lot of people give
me crap, though.
And they're like,
you're not supposed
to go out and speak
about these things!
You're not supposed to go out
and represent a fellowship.
And I just tell them what
I tell you right now.
I'm not representing
a fellowship.
any fellowship.
I'm not a member
of a fellowship.
I'm a human being, and I walk
the path of the 12 steps.
And it saved my life from
acute drug addiction.
And the path of
yoga and meditation
and healthy, conscious
lifestyle choices
took me the rest of the way.
Now, I do in my life
just what that guy who
had that spiritual
awakening back in 1935,
just what he figured out.
Now, I pass it on to
another human being.
But I don't do it
from within the guise
of I'm a broken person,
or I'm still an addict,
or I'm still suffering.
No, no no.
I just do it as a human being.
That means I have joy.
I have challenges.
I suffer and grieve.
I get better and well.
I have fun.
I have a complete and
full and wonderful life.
And from that place,
I'm truly able to help
another human being.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So you don't
agree with that language
of once an addict, I am an
addict languaging, do you?
>>ROSEN: No, that's
problematic for me as a yogi
and as a human being.
So what we-- I want
to be very clear here.
I love the 12 step program, very
helpful to me, saved my life.
>>LISA: Totally.
>>ROSEN: So this is not
bashing that society
or bashing that program.
>>LISA: Please, yeah.
>>ROSEN: It's simply saying
that the 12 steps are
too effective to overlook, but
they're not effective enough
to say that they're perfect
and beyond improvement.
That the way people
approach them
in this society that's around
them should be always looking
to figure out how can
it do things better?
One of the off-putting
things about that society,
I think, to many people
that I've spoken with
is that they don't
understand why-- so I'm
23 years sober, right?
I haven't had a drink
or a drug for 23 years.
You would think, as
a casual onlooker,
you think, well, you
must be better now.
You must be cured.
But if I raise my
hand in front of you,
and you don't understand.
I say, my name is
Tommy, I'm an addict.
You say, well, I
don't understand.
When do you get better
from this thing?
>>LISA: Right.
So what would you raise
your hand and say instead?
My name is Tommy--
>>ROSEN: I'm in
recovery from addiction.
Or I'm a person in
long term recovery.
Or I have experienced addiction.
Or I've recovered from drug
addiction and alcoholism.
>>LISA: Or I moved beyond.
>>ROSEN: I've moved
beyond addiction.
That would really
raise some feathers.
>>LISA: Would it?
>>ROSEN: Oh, that would be
a revolutionary statement.
I've moved beyond addiction.
You see?
Because most people in the field
don't believe that's possible.
Now, what I'm interested in
in your question earlier was,
how should we treat addicts?
We should treat
them with treatment.
We should treat them
with compassionate means
to help them get better
from a disease recognized
by the American Medical
Association that
has a treatment.
If you apply the
treatment, you get better.
Once you get better,
you need to start
thinking about
bringing lifestyle
elements into your life that
are going to make your body
and your mind work really well.
Keep moving forward
in your life.
But at some point, that I'm
Tommy and I'm an addict,
it has to change.
Because I truly believe we're
moving beyond addiction.
And if you don't
think it's possible,
you're not going to try
to go beyond addiction.
Someone would have to
tell you it's possible.
It's hard, but try.
>>LISA: Maybe it's the
first five years, two years
or whatever.
You say that.
And then, you start at the mile
marker, I've moved beyond--
>>ROSEN: Stages of recovery.
And it happens at different
times for different people.
>>LISA: I see.
>>ROSEN: People say, well,
now you're recovered.
Does that mean you can go out
and drink and it's no problem?
No.
It means I have no desire to do
something that would intoxicate
my mind, body, and spirit.
>>LISA: Ever again.
>>ROSEN: I have no desire.
>>LISA: And you're not
in resistance to it.
You just don't have
any desire for it.
>>ROSEN: Why would I do that?
I'm interested in
greater awareness,
greater consciousness.
That's what gets me jazzed.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
That's beautiful.
There's a whole piece
here where Tommy's
talking about moving beyond.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-So I guess the whole point
of this is just simply to say,
if we're really going to
move forward as a society,
we're going to have to start
to understand what works about
the 12 steps and what doesn't.
We can't throw it out as if it's
the baby with the bath water.
The 12 steps, there's such
magic and such power in there.
But the fact is it's
not a perfect program.
It's too effective
to be overlooked,
but it's not effective enough
to be beyond improvement.
So we're going to have to
take a deep look at that.
And we're going to have
to look at our policy.
How do we treat
addicts in our world?
Do we send them to prison?
It's basically a school for
becoming an addict, right?
Or are we going to help
them get treatment?
There's a lot of
room for improvement.
But we really have to
come together right now,
and we have to take a holistic
approach to this thing.
We have to understand
addiction goes way
beyond just drugs and alcohol.
And in our treatment
approaches, we
have to understand that
things like learning
how to breathe properly, like
in the yogic style of breathing
and meditation, are going
to be very important.
That treating our body
well, and actually
learning how to manage stress,
that's going to be important.
We're going to have to
learn that food is not
an outside issue.
Food is an inside issue.
And if we don't take a look
at our relationship to food,
there's going to be
something seriously missing
from our path of recovery.
We're going to have
to learn that things
like vocational
training, life coaching,
and actually learning what
our mission and our purpose
is on this planet, those
are important things.
And if we bring those
things into recovery
at the right stage
when a person is ready,
the likelihood of that person
going back and relapsing
is going to be
greatly decreased.
These are the tenets
of recovery 2.0.
Obviously, I'm passionate
about this movement.
about the 12 steps.
And I see the doctrine as
this golden, beautiful thing
that it was when it was created,
and it's still the same way
today.
And all I wish for is that
everybody who would seek
would have access to that
doctrine without fearing
that there was a cult or
religion or all the weirdness
or any barrier to entry to it.
I want you to understand
these steps work.
They treat addiction.
There is a way through.
You do not have to be stuck
for the rest of your life.
And when you get
beyond acute addiction,
you can add other
elements into your life
to live the life of
your dreams and beyond.
That's the message.
My name's Tommy, and
I am not an addict.
I'm a human being on
the path of recovery.
And I'm a success story today.
I want you to tell me
your success story.
Use #movebeyond and tell me
what a success looks like to you
on your path of recovery.
Thank you.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I love that you get
people involved and interactive
so that they can also hashtag
you and talk about how they can
move beyond because
you are creating
a revolution with your
conversation today.
This, by the way, is just the
beginning of what Tommy teaches
and his body of work.
This interview is
just the beginning.
>>ROSEN: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: You have so much more
to contribute and to give
and to offer and to
help with for people.
I so appreciate it.
>>ROSEN: Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you
so much, so much.
>>ROSEN: It's great
to talk to you.
>>LISA: You too, you too.
I invite you to watch this
interview with Tommy Rosen
and share it with your friends.
You can do that by
going to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]